Music Therapy & Dementia Care
Rachael Finnerty RP, MTA, MMT, MA

Learning Objectives
                      ●   What is Ageing?
                      ●   Perspectives on Ageing
                      ●   Dementia
                      ●   Reasons for Referral
                      ●   Pre-composed music

What is Ageing?
● To date there exists NO NORMATIVE established values of what cognitive impairment or memory loss, or what neurochemical and neurophysiological changes accompany normal aging
● Complex developmental process that involves the intersection of physical, psychological and social factors
● Older adults: fastest growing population

Definitions of Age
● Chronological Age – the number of years
● Biological Age – on going physical process (birth → death)
   ○ Wrinkles, Grey hair, Loss of stamina, Change in weight, Bone density, muscle strength, Cellular, molecular, organ functions become less efficient with age.
● Psychological Age
   ○ Ability to respond to a changing environment and adapt to new situations
   ○ Learning/emotions (computers, smart phones)
   ○ Insisting on writing and storing everything on paper.
● Psychosocial Age – cultural views and expectations

Increased Longevity
● Medicine
● Life-styles
● Health Care

Betty White – @ 95yrs old.
● https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=TxgzgQgOj1A
Rest in Peace 2021 – 99yrs old


Portrayal of Age influenced by Culture & Societal Norms
●   Negative portrayal of the elderly
●   Nothing to contribute
●   Booming Cosmetic Industry
●   Some non-western culture: elders - high regard/wisdom
Images: [The 19 Best Anti-Aging Products on Amazon - Including a $29 Face lift in a jar]
[5 Makup tips to help you look younger]
[Anti-aging eyelid tape]
[Wrinkles should merely indicate where smiles have been -Mark Twain]

Music Therapy and Ageing
● All people age differently we need to take into account all influencers
● Music Therapy at a LTC: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=tBQFSOwLOWg



Timeline of dementia research focus
Histology(1906-1910): New staining methods let scientists see microscopic plaques and tangles
Biochemistry(1960-1990)
Genetics(1980-2000)
Brain imaging(1990-2020)

1906: Alzheimer described first patient
1907: Fischer published description of plaques
1910: Alzheimer's disease named
1960s: Electron microscope can zoom in on plaques and tangles
1970s: Alzheimer's recognized as the most common form of dementia and different from mild cognitive decline associated with ageing. CT scan shows shrinkage of diseased brains.
1980s: Molecular and biochemical advances see tau and amyloid-S identified as components of tangles and plagues
1990s: Genetic mutations in Alzheimer's disease identified. Risk factors identified. Stages of dementia categorized. Brain imaging improves.
2000s: Biological understanding of processes that cause dementia better understood - genetics, molecular biology, brain imaging
2020: effective treatment?
https://qbi.uq.edu.au/brain/dementia/history-dementia-
research#:~:text=The%20most%20common%20dementia%20was,old%20woman%20with%20dementia%20sympto
ms.

Dementia
Dementia is not a single disease, but an umbrella term describing a collection of symptoms from a range of conditions that cause parts of the brain to deteriorate progressively. Dementia affects functions such as memory,
perception, behaviour, language, and personality.

Difficult to diagnose
● What is “normal” degeneration vs. Dementia
● Masked by depression ( can also cause cognitive and behavioural disorders)
● Estimated that 20 – 30% will have an accompanying depression

MMSE – assessment tool
● Brief cognitive test ( Folstein, Folstein & McHugh 1975)
● Widely used ( gold standard )
● 11-question measure that tests five areas of cognitive function: orientation, registration, attention and calculation, recall, and language.

Dementia
● Progressive deterioration (language and memory)
● Music abilities preserved – uses both hemispheres of the brain
● Musicality & singing rarely tested as features of cognitive deterioration
● MiDAS

Dementia & HealthCare
● Cost of institutional care in USA over $25billion/year ( Steg1990)
● Estimates suggest 15% of people over 65yrs will have moderate dementia
● Need for treatment initiatives

Reasons for Referral
●   Likes music?
●   Good at music?
●   Gifted at music?
●   Responds to music?
●   Was in a choir….?
●   Having Dementia?
●   Decrease pacing, agitation, vocalizations
●   Increase eye contact, meaningful moments
●   Increase alertness, movement
●   Evoke positive memories, orientation to the “here and now”
●   Transition to facility, lessen confusion, decrease anxiety

Research into Outcomes of MT
● Most published work re: MT & elderly (group MT)
   ○ enhance socialization and communication (reduce isolation)
   ○ muscular stimulation / fine & gross motor skills

MT interventions in Dementia Care
●   Singing
●   Improvisation
●   Playing instruments ( ie Bell choir )
●   Song writing

Pre-composed Music
● Why is it such a powerful tool?
● MT interventions: (Singing – Playing Instruments – Listening –
  Improvisation)
● Benefits: Oxygen saturation, movement, empowerment, Quality of
  Life(QOL), communication.

Entertainment vs. Music Therapy
●   Isn’t this a sing-a-long?
●   Entertainment? (What makes it MT?)
●   Familiarity/Predictable music (ABA) – Que Serra Serra
●   Secure, empowering, reassurance, confidence, memory-evoking
●   Stimulate dialogue/relationships ( Italian song & Neighbours )

Use of meaningful music: Class Example
● Earliest music memory
● Write down memory evoked
● Music Time Line

Group & Individual Sessions
Bell Choir –example
Performing as a MT Goal?

Name that tune
●   (Low) G C D EE
●   EDE CC
●   CDE F A
●   AGF E
●   CDE FA
●   AGF EC
●   CDE F DD
●   EC

Song writing
● Que Sera Sera

iPod Project
● Not music therapy, but important for understanding music as a tool in
  health care.
● Alive Inside Video: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=8HLEr-zP3fc


Alzheimer’s – Music and Changes in the Brain
● https://medicalxpress.com/news/2018-04-music-regions-brain-alzheimer-
  disease.html

In Summary - Key Points
● Ageing is a complex, dynamic process
● Dementia is an umbrella term describing a collection of symptoms from a range of conditions that cause parts of the brain to deteriorate progressively. Dementia affects functions such as memory, perception, behaviour, language, and personality.
● MT can help manage symptoms of Dementia
● Precomposed music can evoke meaningful memories
● MT interventions can enhance QOL, meaningful interactions, empower, assist with maintenance of physical health/movement