Music Therapy for Managing Symptoms of an Acquired Brain Injury

Introduction to Music Therapy 
Rachael Finnerty RP, MTA, MMT, MA

ABI - Traumatic? NonTraumatic? Concussion?
Acquired Brain injury is an umbrella term for all brain injuries. Brain injuries can be classified as either Traumatic or Non-Traumatic.

Link below provides definitions. Please read & watch video.
https://obia.ca/resources/brain-injury-information/

Acquired Brain Injury (ABI)
● An ABI patient often deals with:
   ○ Loss
   ○ Emotional Crisis
   ○ Adjustment
   ○ Rehabilitation
   ○ Identity

How can an ABI effect speech?
● Aphasia: cognitively aware of what one wants to say – cannot find the words
● Dyspraxia: difficulty articulating speech
● Please watch both video examples of ABI and speech rehabilitation.

How can Music Therapy facilitate goals related to ABI Symptoms?

Music therapy in the treatment of patients with neuro-behavioural disorders stemming from acquired brain injury
Hitchen, Holly, Magee, Wendy L. and Soeterik, Sonja(2010) 'Music therapy in the treatment of patients
with neuro-behavioural disorders stemming from acquired brain injury', Nordic Journal of Music Therapy,
                                           19: 1, 63 — 78

Music therapy interventions & ABI
● Music Therapy in action with an individual with a neurological
   disease.

ABI & Songwriting in Music Therapy
● A study analyzing 82 songs written by TBI patients and the most common themes were:
      ○ Isolation
      ○ Dependency
      ○ Helplessness
      ○ Body Image
      ○ Anger


     Kennelly, Jeanette & Tamplin, Jeanette. (2005). Songwriting to explore identity change and
     sense of self-concept following traumatic brain injury.

Sam – 19- TBI
● Train Accident
● Physically disabled
● Speech impaired

Sam - Filthy Song – self composed - THEME: loss
(Am) I feel like shit (G)
(D) I hate it here (C)
(Am) I miss my friends (G)
(D) wish they were near (C)
(G) I feel (D) so bad (C), I want to walk (G) again (D) , like I used to
do (C)
(G) I love (D) my dad (C) because he believes in me (G)
Verse 1
(Em) I hate this place(C), (A) it bores me (Am) to tears (Em)
And I feel (C) like no (A)thing(Am) in this (Em) universe
(Em) I hate this place (C) ,(A) I'm sick of it (Am)
(Em) Want to escape (C) from this (A) hell (Am) Hole that I'm in
(Em)

Power of Melody & Lyrics
Best music therapy interventions for an ABI?
Best music therapy approach for an ABI?