Chapter 5 – Music Therapy Approaches

Music therapy concepts and practices have evolved primarily through the premises of psychotherapy and occupational therapy. While psychotherapy promotes self-actualization and emotional expression, occupational therapy emphasizes the importance of the physiological and environmental factors that shape the healing process and rehabilitation. Music therapy combines aspects of each to address all angles of a person’s health and wellbeing. Different combinations of such aspects, along with advances in research and technology, have led to the creation of various structures of music therapy practice.

As a result, in addition to implementing the interventions discussed in Chapter 4, music therapists work within the guidelines of various music therapy approaches or models in which they must be specifically trained to utilize them in their practice. No single approach is superior to the others. While some approaches are more effective for a given illness or patient population, each has its own benefits. The approach that a music therapist employs depends on their training, experience, interests, and strengths, as well as the unique needs and health care goals of each individual patient. Music therapists may also choose to draw on techniques from multiple approaches to provide the best patient care.

Within each approach, music can play one of two roles: music as therapy, in which music itself facilitates goal progression through active participation; or music in therapy, which involves music as one of multiple tools used in the therapy process. While the former places the main therapy focus on music, the latter uses music in combination with other therapeutic methods and techniques. The degree of involvement of music in a patient’s treatment plan reflects the goals and desires of the patient. The health care team devises a therapeutic plan with the combination of techniques that they believe will most benefit the patient, including the ways in which music should be used.

The development and use of the various music therapy approaches have been influenced throughout time by many factors, such as the economic, governmental, and societal pressures of each country, as well as both research advances and a growing demand for further empirical evidence. Economic circumstances often dictate the acceptance and availability of music therapy in different societies, primarily due to restrictive funding for both practice and research, despite a common emphasis on evidence-based practice. Insufficient funding can often set limitations on the utilization and scope of the approaches, as well as the ability of patients to afford it in the first place. Government policy has shaped the development and implementation of music therapy approaches through, for example, the creation of standards of care for specific patient populations, and the promotion and financial support of music therapy as a widely beneficial means of treatment. Deinstitutionalization also influenced treatment plans and the flexibility of the implementation of various music therapy approaches. In addition, technological and research advances, such as the use of technology for monitoring brain activity and responses to musical stimulation, have led to the modernization and further development of various approaches. This chapter will explore the concepts and methods of ten of the most common music therapy approaches.

OVERVIEW
Nordoff-Robbins Approach
Psychodynamic Approach
Guided Imagery and Music (GIM)
Neurologic Music Therapy (NMT)
Behavioural Music Therapy (BMT)
Cognitive Behavioural Music Therapy (CBMT)
Biomedical Model
Vocal Psychotherapy
Eclectic Model
Community Music Therapy (CMT)

THE NORDOFF-ROBBINS APPROACH

Paul Nordoff and Clive Robbins were influential music therapists whose common passion stemmed from their individual careers in music and child education, respectively. Paul Nordoff was a well-trained American musician and composer, with bachelor’s and master’s degrees in music from the Philadelphia Conservatory of Music, as well as formal piano training from the Juilliard School of Music. Clive Robbins was a British special education teacher with a passion for improving the lives of disabled children. He, too, enjoyed music, but lost his ability to play piano following a serious hand injury. Nordoff and Robbins met in 1959. Robbins was inspired when Nordoff performed and discussed his musical compositions at an institution in England for children with mental disabilities called the Sunfield Children’s Home, where Robbins worked as an educator. Later that year, Nordoff moved to England and returned to Sunfield to pursue music therapy.

Nordoff and Robbins had both developed a strong fascination for the use of music as a form of treatment. Over the following few years, they worked together to develop a music-as-therapy approach focusing on improvisation techniques and active participation for the treatment of disabled children. They later went on to travel throughout Europe, sharing their techniques with other professionals in the field, and moved to the United States where they further developed their approach and published several articles and books.

The first training program for Nordoff-Robbins music therapy was developed in England in 1974. Today, these educational programs can be found in various countries throughout the world. To be certified in and implement the Nordoff-Robbins approach in practice, music therapy practitioners must be trained at a designated Nordoff-Robbins institution. However, music therapists who are not Nordoff-Robbins certified may still draw upon concepts and techniques from the approach to use in their practice. The Nordoff-Robbins approach, also referred to as creative music therapy, began with a focus on mentally disabled children, but has since expanded to include various patient populations.

Nordoff and Robbins believed that the music itself facilitated the therapy, and that no diagnosis could prevent music from reaching a person and helping them in some way. They proposed that somewhere within everyone there is an innate musical quality or connection, which they referred to as the “music child.” They believed this was the key to change. Therapeutic benefit could therefore be achieved by awakening the music child to meaningfully engage in music and experience the resulting effects on the body and mind.

Although insufficient funding often prevents multiple music therapists from working simultaneously with a single patient, the Nordoff-Robbins approach traditionally involves a patient improvising in conjunction with two music therapists: one playing the piano or another instrument, and the other working closely with the patient to provide any additional support or assistance. This structure was developed to complement the musical abilities of Paul Nordoff and the interpersonal skills of Clive Robbins. While Nordoff contributed the musical resources and creative improvisational methods, Robbins’ experience in working with children facilitated the purposeful and effective engagement of the patients.

When implementing the Nordoff-Robbins approach, patients are encouraged to explore various improvisation techniques with an emphasis on free and creative expression. The music itself is the main focus of this approach. There are no specific requirements for verbal processing following an improvisation session. Nordoff and Robbins believed that the music, along with its inherent health benefits, speaks for itself. In addition to its use in individual therapy, the Nordoff-Robbins approach may also be implemented in group sessions, following the same premise and structure.

The creative improvisation techniques implemented in the Nordoff-Robbins approach help patients to surmount emotional, physical, and cognitive challenges. The approach seeks to make patients feel as though they are participating equally with the music therapists throughout the therapy process and can be comfortable exploring free expression. Not only can the Nordoff-Robbins approach promote self-confidence, stress release, and emotional understanding, it can also be beneficial for learning social and communication skills, as well as for cognitive development and physical rehabilitation.

THE PSYCHODYNAMIC APPROACH

Sigmund Freud, a prominent psychologist of the late 1800s and early 1900s, developed a psychology model called Psychodynamic Theory. Freud believed that human personality and behaviour are a result of the interaction between different levels of psychological processes and awareness. In particular, he emphasized the unconscious mind, the level of awareness influenced by impulses, desires, repressed or unresolved conflicts, and childhood experiences.

Freud stressed the importance of accessing the unconscious mind in the treatment of psychological conditions. He hypothesized that the key to treating abnormalities in personality and behaviour is bringing unconscious thought into consciousness in order to identify the roots of the symptoms. He did so by employing techniques such as free association, a method that involves openly discussing any words or thoughts that come to mind in a therapy session, possibly in response to an image, topic, or concept presented by the therapist. Exploring these words, even if they seem unrelated or unremarkable, can provide insight into unconscious thought processes that may unknowingly be causing distress.

Psychodynamic Theory was further developed by psychologists Carl Jung, Alfred Adler, and Erik Erikson. Carl Jung studied Freudian theories and developed a method of psychodynamic therapy involving the creation of various forms of art as a means of accessing the unconscious mind. Although he did not specifically use music as an art form in his work, this approach inspired pioneering music therapists of the mid-1950s, such as Juliette Alvin and Mary Priestley, to apply psychodynamic concepts to their music therapy practice.

The Psychodynamic Approach in music therapy is centered upon the use of creative musical expression to explore the unconscious mind. Music can help to identify and subsequently improve destructive thought patterns and undesirable or maladaptive behavioural traits. Improvisation, songwriting, lyric analysis, and facilitated music listening may all be used in the implementation of the Psychodynamic Approach. These interventions assist in bringing underlying thoughts and experiences into consciousness where they can safely and effectively be explored and better understood.

The Psychodynamic Approach is useful in the treatment of various psychological conditions, such as eating disorders, obsessive compulsive disorder, impulse control disorders, substance abuse, personality disorders, and schizophrenia, as well as mental illnesses resulting from abuse or other traumas. For many patients, musical expression is less intimidating than talk-based methods of therapy and often presents a more effective opportunity for addressing psychological conflicts. The Psychodynamic Approach may help to promote stress release, stability, self-esteem, self-regulation, and healthy coping mechanisms, in addition to improving identity perception and symptoms relating to anxiety or depression.

THE GUIDED IMAGERY AND MUSIC (GIM) APPROACH

In the mid 20th century, the hallucinogen Lysergic acid diethylamide (LSD) was investigated in clinical research for its therapeutic potential in psychiatric conditions. Its visual hallucinogenic and reality-distorting effects facilitated the use of imagery in the treatment of mental illnesses. Studies found that clinical LSD use often led to decreased anxiety, distress, and suicidal ideation, as well as improvement of maladjusted behaviours.

In the 1970s, American music therapist Helen Bonny proposed the use of music as a replacement for LSD, based on the idea that music had the power to promote similar therapeutic benefits through imagery. Bonny reasoned that the phases of LSD effects were homologous to shifts in consciousness brought about by the purposeful use of facilitated music listening. She developed the Guided Imagery and Music (GIM) approach, recognizing that external influences such as music could be powerful tools in facilitating imagery and inner reflection.

In a speech given at an international music therapy conference in Japan in 2000, Bonny stated that GIM involves the purposeful use of prepared classical music by a guide or facilitator to evoke sensory and emotional responses in the listener. These responses, in the form of imagery, symbols, feelings, life review, sensations, unfolding metaphors, and transformative experiences, become the heart of the session. Through relaxation, verbal intervention, and knowledgeable application of the music, the client receives insights leading to healing and therapeutic resolution.

Although Bonny prepared classical playlists, modern GIM can involve any music genre suited to the patient’s needs. Carefully selected music can evoke memories and hidden emotions through imagery, providing powerful healing potential. The GIM approach emphasizes pre-composed music and facilitated listening rather than musical creation, accompanied by discussion of imagery that arises during the session.

Imagery is not limited to visualization. Images may occur through smell, taste, hearing, or touch. All forms are encouraged and explored. GIM also draws on psychodynamic concepts, promoting relaxation to assist access to unconscious thought.

The GIM approach has proven effective in treating patients with cancer, rheumatoid arthritis, chronic pain, PTSD, depression, and other physical and psychological illnesses. Specialization in GIM requires additional training, typically part-time over three years.

NEUROLOGIC MUSIC THERAPY (NMT)

Neurologic Music Therapy is based on the connection between music and brain function. This research-driven approach was developed in the early 1990s primarily by Dr. Michael Thaut. NMT emphasizes evidence-based practice, increasing acceptance within the medical community.

NMT can involve both receptive music therapy and active musical creation, producing measurable physiological outcomes. Unlike more variable approaches, NMT uses standardized interventions with proven efficacy that can be applied uniformly by trained practitioners. Thaut describes 20 techniques in Rhythm, Music, and the Brain (2005), including rhythmic auditory stimulation, melodic intonation therapy, muscle sensory orientation training, and music neglect training.

NMT benefits patients with neurological impairments affecting sensory, cognitive, or motor processes. It is used in sensorimotor and speech-language rehabilitation following stroke or brain injury, and for conditions such as hemineglect, developmental disabilities, dementia, Parkinson’s disease, Huntington’s disease, Alzheimer’s disease, and multiple sclerosis.

Implementation requires completion of NMT-specific training, typically several days to a week of intensive conceptual and clinical education. This training is also available to other health care professionals who can play an instrument.

BEHAVIOURAL MUSIC THERAPY (BMT)

Early behavioural theories were developed by Ivan Pavlov, B.F. Skinner, and John B. Watson. Pavlov’s Classical Conditioning demonstrated that associating two stimuli could elicit a learned behavioural response. Skinner’s Operant Conditioning proposed that behaviours are shaped by reinforcement or punishment. Watson emphasized environmental influence on behaviour.

Behavioural Music Therapy is based on these theories and uses music as a stimulus to modify behaviour. Musical rewards or deterrents reinforce or discourage behaviours. BMT is results-driven and focuses on reducing maladaptive behaviours while promoting healthy alternatives. Music is an effective tool for behavioural regulation, and musical reward is the most common technique.

BMT can modify behaviours in patients with behavioural and intellectual disorders, personality disorders, eating disorders, substance abuse, and other mental illnesses. It is also beneficial for children with developmental, cognitive, or psychiatric conditions affecting communication and socialization.

An example of BMT is found in neonatal care, where infants in neonatal intensive care units hear music while sucking on a soother. The music stops when sucking stops, reinforcing the behaviour and enhancing feeding skills.

COGNITIVE BEHAVIOURAL MUSIC THERAPY (CBMT)

Cognitive Behavioural Therapy integrates psychodynamic and behavioural concepts. CBT focuses on identifying and changing irrational thought patterns that lead to maladaptive behaviours. By shifting negative perceptions, destructive behaviours often improve.

CBMT applies CBT concepts using music therapy interventions such as lyric analysis and songwriting. It targets underlying cognitive processes and promotes positive self-perception and coping strategies. Musical expression helps patients develop new perspectives on conflicts and emotions, improving behaviours rooted in irrational thinking.

CBMT can be used in individual or group settings and is particularly effective for behavioural disorders and mental illnesses rooted in negative thought patterns. Improvements may include reduced anxiety, intrusive thoughts, and reactive behaviours. Effectiveness is enhanced when the therapist has specific CBT training.

THE BIOMEDICAL MODEL

The Biomedical Model focuses on the physiological effects of music on systems such as heart rate, blood pressure, immune function, and pain perception. This evidence-based approach targets biological dysfunction underlying physical or psychiatric illness and produces measurable outcomes.

Music therapy within this model can reduce or replace certain medications, particularly for pain, sleep, or anesthesia, and is useful when medications cause side effects or are contraindicated. It can be implemented during medical procedures to reduce stress and anesthesia needs.

Pain management is a common application. Music distracts the brain from pain signals and stimulates the release of endorphins, relieving both acute and chronic pain. This improves quality of life, especially for patients in long-term or palliative care.

The Biomedical Model also treats cardiovascular, respiratory, cognitive, and neurological symptoms. Music therapists collaborate with the full health care team. Interventions include pre-composed music, facilitated listening, and improvisation, depending on patient goals.

THE VOCAL PSYCHOTHERAPY APPROACH

Vocal Psychotherapy was developed by Dr. Diane Austin and focuses on the voice as a means of physical and psychological change. Influenced by Carl Jung, Austin viewed the voice as central to development, emotion, relationships, and thought. Vocal expression is used to explore memories, emotions, and behaviours within a psychotherapeutic framework.

Austin defines Vocal Psychotherapy as the use of breath, sounds, vocal improvisation, songs, and dialogue within the client-therapist relationship to promote intrapsychic and interpersonal growth and change. Free vocalization encourages the emergence of suppressed inner voices.

Key techniques include vocal holding and free associative singing. Vocal holding involves the therapist playing repetitive chords while the patient freely vocalizes, supported by the therapist’s voice. This creates safety, structure, and trust, allowing exploration of emotions and experiences.

Free associative singing adapts Freud’s free association into singing. Patients sing thoughts as they arise while the therapist accompanies and mirrors phrases. This technique reveals unconscious emotions and connections between past experiences and current distress.

Vocal Psychotherapy addresses trauma, mental illness, developmental delays, memory, self-awareness, and confidence. Advanced training is required, with certificate programs available in Canada, the United States, and through distance learning.

THE ECLECTIC MODEL

The Eclectic Model recognizes the complexity of human health and integrates techniques from multiple music therapy approaches. It is personalized and humanistic, allowing therapists to apply methods from various models in which they are trained to best meet patient needs.

This approach is particularly useful for patients with multiple symptoms or conditions affecting several body systems. For example, chronic pain and mobility issues combined with psychiatric symptoms may require biomedical, neurologic, and psychodynamic interventions. The model’s flexibility allows comprehensive treatment.

COMMUNITY MUSIC THERAPY (CMT)

Community Music Therapy differs from traditional clinical approaches by focusing on group-based interventions and community wellbeing. It aims to improve shared symptoms, unite populations, and foster a sense of community. It can be implemented in hospitals, psychiatric units, prisons, long-term care homes, and palliative care facilities.

CMT does not require referrals, assessments, or treatment plans but must be facilitated by a credentialed music therapist. Participation is voluntary and inclusive regardless of musical ability. The therapist participates equally, promoting empowerment and equality.

CMT addresses physical and mental health symptoms as well as shared social conflicts. Goals include stress relief, socialization, communication, mood enhancement, confidence, and self-expression. Singing and improvisation are most common, sometimes alongside songwriting or performance.

Therapists must understand the cultural, social, and systemic context of the population. CMT often focuses on lived experience rather than diagnosis and may aim to reduce stigma and raise societal awareness.

CONCLUSION

Music therapy is a flexible and versatile treatment modality that allows for highly personalized care. As research and technology advance, music therapy approaches continue to evolve and gain medical acceptance. Their diversity enables application across countless conditions and populations.

Despite progress, limited access to specialized training remains a challenge. Many approaches require travel or geographic restriction. With continued research and acceptance, the field aims to expand educational opportunities.

The remaining chapters address music therapy interventions and approaches used for specific conditions and populations, emphasizing research, case studies, and clinical examples.

Consider the following questions:
Classify each approach as music as therapy or music in therapy.
What does it mean that music speaks for itself in the Nordoff-Robbins approach?
What is the unconscious mind and how does it influence health?
How can GIM influence physical health?
How does BMT differ from CBMT?
Which improvisation techniques are used in vocal holding and free associative singing?
How does CMT differ from community choirs?

Abbreviations:
GIM: Guided Imagery and Music
LSD: Lysergic acid diethylamide
PTSD: Post-traumatic stress disorder
NMT: Neurologic Music Therapy
BMT: Behavioural Music Therapy
CBT: Cognitive Behavioural Therapy
CBMT: Cognitive Behavioural Music Therapy
CMT: Community Music Therapy

FURTHER READING

Austin, D.S. 2008. The Theory and Practice of Vocal Psychotherapy: Songs of the Self. Jessica Kingsley Publishers.
Beck, B.D., et al. 2015. Coping with work-related stress through guided imagery and music (GIM): randomized controlled trial. Journal of Music Therapy, 52(3): 323–352.
Beyers, K.L. 2016. A History of the Music Therapy Profession: Diverse Concepts and Practices. Barcelona Publishers.
Bonny, H.L. 2001. Music psychotherapy: guided imagery and music (presentation). Voices.
Davis, W.B., et al. 2008. An Introduction to Music Therapy: Theory and Practice. 3rd ed. American Music Therapy Association.
Edwards, J. 2016. The Oxford Handbook of Music Therapy. Oxford University Press.
Kim, Y. 2004. The early beginnings of Nordoff-Robbins music therapy. Journal of Music Therapy, 41(4): 321–339.
Macdonald, R., et al. 2013. Music, Health & Wellbeing. Oxford University Press.
Monti, E., and Austin, D. 2018. The dialogical self in vocal psychotherapy. Nordic Journal of Music Therapy, 27(2): 158–169.
Taylor, D.B. 2010. Biomedical Foundations of Music as Therapy. 2nd ed. Barton Publications.
Thaut, M.H. 2005. Rhythm, Music, and the Brain: Scientific Foundations and Clinical Applications. Routledge.
Thaut, M.H., and Hoemberg, V. 2014. Handbook of Neurologic Music Therapy. Oxford University Press.
Thaut, M.H., et al. 2015. Neurobiological foundations of neurologic music therapy: rhythmic entrainment and the motor system. Frontiers in Psychology, 5(1185).